IMPERIALISM
Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century
The Second Century of Imperialism:
100 Years since Lenin’s Imperialism
New Forms of Exploitation of Africa by Monopoly Capitalism: From Lenin’s Imperialism to the Imperialism
The Current Phase of Imperialism and China
Imperialism, Ultra-imperialism and the Rise of China
Lenin’s Theory of Imperialism and the 21st Century American Empire Roland G. 
The Future of Imperialism and Socialism
It is with great pleasure that the Institute of Political Economy (IPE) is publishing this book in commemoration of the hundredth anniversary of the first publication of Lenin's Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism. 
Lenin wrote Imperialism, one of his major works, amid a raging World War I.
In it he described the five features of monopoly capitalism or modern imperialism: 1) the concentration of production and capital leading to monopolies that dominate the economy; 2) the merger of industrial and bank capital, translating into finance capital, that lead to the rule of finance oligarchy; 3) the export of surplus capital to other countries, driving imperialist expansion; 4) the formation of international cartels or economic alliances that carve up the world; and 5) the complete division of the world among the imperialist powers.
In this book, Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century, we present eight in-depth chapters from eminent thinkers and authors tackling the various aspects of imperialism in the current milieu. 
Two distinguished authors tackle the place of China in today’s world, with Pao-yu Ching writing on the current phase of imperialism and China and Fred Engst investigating imperialism, ultra-imperialism and the rise of China. 
Meanwhile, Roland Simbulan analyses various instruments of the 21st century American empire and the people’s struggles against imperialism. 
vi Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century Finally, Prof. 
Jose Maria Sison writes about the future of moribund imperialism, and resurgence of the only alternative, socialism.
We hope that this book contributes to a deeper understanding of the violent, destructive, dying system that is imperialism and inspire the advance of anti-imperialist, democratic and socialist movements to seize victory for the only lasting alternative to capitalism.
The Second Century of Imperialism
If the first century of imperialism started in the mid-19th century and saw the emergence of international cartels, carving spheres of influence, wars of aggression and colonialism as described by Lenin, the second century of imperialism was ushered by the Second World War and the postwar economic boom—where US imperialism emerged ultimate victor in military and economic terms. 
It was not without the contention of the socialist bloc under the leadership of the Soviet Union that countered US imperialism and the continuing policy of wars of aggression. 
The USSR eventually became a social-imperialist power and engaged with a hegemonic competition with US imperialism that became known as the Cold War. 
But with the ultimate decline of monopoly capital, imperialism constructed neoliberalism as its savior in the 1970‒80s. 
2 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century Establishment of US Economic Hegemony
The financial and monetary system built up and controlled by US imperialism has become one of the key drivers of imperialist economic control and exploitation of poor countries seeking to emerge from the ruins of war. 
4 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century Table 1. 
6 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century Table 2. 
8 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century formally opened on January 1, 1995. 
10 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century Ghana that broke the consensus, the MIA would have sealed an expansion of the WTO and neoliberal globalization more broadly.11
Some were sponsored by US imperialism like Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC), the Transpacific Partnership Agreement (TPPA), or the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP).
12 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century
Condition of permanent crisis in the neocolonies has also been intensifying under globalization as monopoly capital seeks more and more ways to pass on the effects of a worsening crisis of imperialism. 
14 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century
The only solution to the suffering of the workers and the peoples of the world is to end the scourge that is imperialism through a peoples’ revolutionary war and build socialism.
The Age of Imperialism. 
18 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century Steger, Manfred B. 
Notes on Monopoly Capital in the 21st Century 100 Years since Lenin’s Imperialism
He defined this as: “capitalism in that stage of development in which the domination of monopolies and finance capital has established itself; in which the export of capital has acquired pronounced importance; in which the division of the world among the international trusts has begun; in which the division of all the territories of the globe among the biggest capitalist powers has been completed.”1 Lenin also called this the era of modern imperialism.
Other authors in this volume and elsewhere have amply discussed the geopolitical aspects of imperialism in the present era.
However, it shows that the forms and means of exploitation and oppression that characterize imperialism have evolved and intensified.
In Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism, Lenin underscored that the
“Imperialism: The Highest Stage of Capitalism.” Marxists Internet Archive. 
20 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century This phenomenon, however, is entirely denied or obscured by the dominant neoliberal discourse of the ruling classes today, at the theoretical, empirical and policy levels.
22 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century Another recent study by three systems theorists at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Zurich revealed an even greater degree of economic concentration today.5 By examining the revenues and ownership of 43,060 MNCs from a database of 37 million companies and investors worldwide, they estimate that the global economy has a dominant core of 147 firms with interlocking stakes in one another.
24 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century This concentration of capital has accelerated over the past four decades owing to neoliberal globalization. 
26 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century
Imperialism in the Twenty-First Century: Globalization, Super-Exploitation, and Capitalism’s Final Crisis. 
28 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century as much as $20 billion was spent on patent litigation and patent purchases in 2010-2011. 
30 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century Once financial capital is consolidated, its biggest owners become the financial oligarchy and rise to the top of the capitalist class. 
32 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century With the proliferation of so many financial instruments that provide quick and high returns, shareholders even in non-financial firms have become much more keen on extracting maximum profits in the shortest amount of time. 
34 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century Table 2. 
36 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century executive or international banker to ignore China’s push to remake global trade.
Imperialism is the eve of revolution
The concentration of capital and monopoly power in the world capitalist system has now reached astounding levels compared to the period when Lenin wrote his popular outline of “Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism.”
The neoliberal counter-revolution since the 1980s has only worsened imperialism’s exploitation of the workers and peoples of the world, and of nature, and has generated crisis after crisis.
But Lenin also said that “imperialism is the eve of the social revolution of the proletariat” which the Bolsheviks proved 100 years ago. 
They must grasp not only how imperialism works, not only
38 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century the objective conditions for revolutionary struggles, but the science of revolution – to which Lenin contributed greatly – in order to fortify the subjective conditions for systemic change. 
42 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century Fortune. 
“Imperialism: The Highest Stage of Capitalism.” Marxists Internet Archive. 
Imperialism in the Twenty-First Century: Globalization, SuperExploitation, and Capitalism’s Final Crisis. 
44 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century UN Conference on Trade and Development. 
From Lenin’s Imperialism to the Imperialism of the Triad in the 21st Century Demba Moussa Dembele
One hundred years ago, Vladimir Ilich Lenin, Karl Marx’s most prominent follower and leader of the October 1917 Russian Revolution, published a book on what he called imperialism, seen as the highest stage of capitalism. 
The first section will introduce the concept of imperialism as seen by some of Lenin’s predecessors. 
The second section will give an overview of the fundamental characteristics of imperialism as exposed by Lenin.
The third section will analyze African perspectives on imperialism. 
The fourth section will expose the manifestations of today’s imperialism in Africa, while the fifth section will give a summary and draw some concluding remarks.
I) The Notion of Imperialism
There were two pioneering works on imperialism before Lenin wrote his book.
English economist John Hobson (1902) was the first to point to the transformation of capitalism into imperialism, in reference to the United Kingdom, the first imperialist nation. 
46 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century because of its immense resources. 
He eventually traveled to Southern Africa, where he met Cecil Rhodes,1 one of the emblematic figures during the golden era of British imperialism.
The second important work on imperialism was done by the Austrian Marxist, Rudolph Hilferding, who published a book in 1910 on the subject. 
Lenin acknowledged their merits, built on their work and went on to expose the most cogent and thorough analysis of imperialism.
II) Lenin’s Analysis of Imperialism
As the title of his book indicates, Lenin observes that imperialism is a particular stage in the development of capitalism. 
1 Cecil Rhodes was such an eminent figure in the galaxy of British imperialism that two of its possessions in Africa were named after him. 
5) Colonial conquests and expansion accelerated with the era of imperialism The exportation of capital became a vehicle for imperialist expansion by the conquest of weaker countries, especially non-European countries. 
Imperialism in history
So, imperialism opens up the possibilities of revolutions, because the intensification of inter-imperialist rivalries for world domination, inevitably leads to
48 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century wars, which, in turn, tend to weaken the whole imperialist system. 
III) African Perspectives on Imperialism
He lived in that country, during a period of great optimism and revolutionary debates on imperialism and socialism, with other fellows who went on to become renowned scholars and revolutionaries, such as Yash Tandon, Dani Nabudere, Issa Shivji and several others. 
50 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century B) Kwame Nkrumah’s contribution
In addition to being a charismatic leader, Nkrumah was a thinker, who wrote several books on capitalism and imperialism. 
One of these books is Neocolonialism, the Last Stage of Imperialism, , first published in 1965.
President Nkrumah also argues that mass media controlled by multinational corporations (MNCs) are instruments of Western imperialism. 
In a masterly analysis in his much acclaimed book Culture and Imperialism published in 1994, the late Edward W. 
These writers and poets made imperialism not only an inevitable fact but also legitimate as a civilizational act.
52 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century C) Samir Amin’s Analysis of Contemporary Imperialism
Samir Amin has dealt with the issue of imperialism in many of his books, over the last 60 years or so. 
His analysis of imperialism was vindicated by the collapse of market fundamentalism in 2008. 
The United States imperialism is at the head of what Samir Amin (2012) calls collective imperialism of the Triad, composed of the United States, Japan and the European Union. 
In Samir Amin’s view, the Triad is a response to growing challenges to western imperialism’s economic, political and military hegemony from rising powers from the South and non-aligned countries. 
In several regions, NATO is in the forefront to serve US imperialism and its subservient allies.
Analyzing Western imperialism strategy in the current crisis of global capitalism, Samir Amin argues that the United States and its allies use a two-track approach.
in Washington – the first ever of its kind – and the growing attention to Africa from Western countries and their institutions are an illustration of how Africa has become important to monopoly capitalism and to the geopolitical strategy of Western imperialism. 
54 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century The European Union has been trying to impose “free trade” agreements on Africa since 2007, under the name of Economic Partnership Agreements (EPAs). 
56 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century The Case of AFRICOM
US imperialism has been paying more attention to Africa over the last several years.
The analysis of imperialism developed by Lenin 100 years ago has stood the test of time. 
Imperialism has become more aggressive and its drive for world domination is even more pronounced today than ever before. 
It has become the leader of subservient imperialists to form what Samir Amin calls collective imperialism of the Triad (US, Europe and Japan). 
Confronted with the crisis of global monopoly capitalism and growing challenges from rising powers from the South, the imperialism of the Triad is pursuing a two-track approach to hold on to its hegemonic position or delay the birth of a multipolar world order.
US imperialism and its subservient allies, the European Union, Japan and others, have developed powerful instruments to defend their aggressive policies everywhere in the world. 
After having weakened most states through IMF and World Bank-imposed policies in the 1980s and 1990s, Western imperialism is using terrorism to further destabilize Africa and use it as a pretext to launch military interventions, with the view to getting a strategic advantage over challenging powers and also prevent popular resistance against imperialist domination and exploitation.
58 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century REFERENCES:
Hobson, John A, Imperialism, London, 1902
Lenin, Vladimir Ilich, Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism, 1916
Nkrumah, Kwame, Neocolonialism, Last Stage of Imperialism, London, 1965
Said, Edward W, Culture and Imperialism, New York, Vintage Books, 1994
The Current Phase of Imperialism and China Pao-yu Ching
In Imperialism: The Highest Stage of Capitalism, published on the eve of Russian’s October revolution in 1917, Lenin analyzed imperialism as a qualitative change in the capitalist relations of production when monopoly finance gained control. 
As such, Lenin made the most important contribution to our understanding of capitalism (imperialism) since Marx and Engels’ groundbreaking work. 
Capitalist development over the last 100 years has not changed the fundamentals of imperialism as analyzed by Lenin, but it has added new developments. 
These new developments are significant enough to constitute a new phase of imperialism in the highest stage of capitalism.
Lenin, and later Mao, based on Lenin’s analysis of imperialism, developed the strategy for liberating exploited people in their countries, which were imperialism’s weakest links. 
The Second World War (WWII) broke out a little over two decades after Lenin’s Imperialism: The Highest Stage of Capitalism was published. 
60 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century 100 years capitalism has gone through recurring, and bigger and deeper crises. 
What should our focus be when we study this new phase of imperialism in regard to China? 
This paper is going to focus on the current phase of imperialism and China’s role in it. 
If we understand the current phase of imperialism correctly, it can help us develop the correct strategy to struggle against it. 
The Current Phase of Imperialism – how did we get here?
The Transformation of Imperialism into a New Phase
These post-war monetary and trade regimes laid down the necessary institutional framework for the new phase of imperialism and twenty-some years of prosperity for capitalism.
62 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century dollar outside of the US is US debt. 
What are the Major Characteristics of the Current Phase of Imperialism?
There are several distinctive characteristics that set the current phase of imperialism apart from the earlier phase analyzed by Lenin. 
The most important features of this new phase of imperialism that emerged from the Bretton Woods Conference was the hegemonic status of US dollar and the US
Lenin emphasized the role of rising monopoly financial capital in his analysis of imperialism. 
64 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century implemented a whole set of sweeping neoliberal economic and political policies which include globalization, liberalization (de-regulation), and privatization – and pushed the developing countries to do the same. 
66 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century environment, finance (banks and security), healthcare, tourism and travel, recreation (entertainment), transport (air, rail, and road). 
In the current phase of imperialism, the trade and investment regime and the hegemonic dollar greatly facilitates the internationalization of production and accumulation.
The Interconnectedness of the Global Capitalist Class During the earlier phase of imperialism, in a semi-feudal and semi-colonial society like China before the revolution, the national capitalists played a positive role in the new democratic revolution. 
However, in this current phase of imperialism, capitalists in developing countries have given up any attempt to develop their economies independent of the global monopoly. 
Therefore, these capitalists of different nationalities are no longer national capitalists in their countries as defined before this current phase of imperialism. 
They will not stand with the working class in their struggles against imperialism.
Although strategies and tactics employed by capitalists to maximize profits are as old as capitalism itself, what is new in this phase of imperialism is that in order to satisfy the desire of global monopoly capital to maximize profits, these states must compete to carry the oppression of labor and exploitation of the environment to an extreme, in order to be chosen as production site in the long global supply chain.
68 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century III. 
China and Chinese People in this New Phase of Imperialism 1. 
China’s role in the new phase of imperialism
On the one hand, China has experienced similar treatment as other developing countries in this phase of imperialism. 
70 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century foreign exchange holdings from $4 trillion to $3 trillion in the year that followed caused fear of further capital flight. 
China’s participation in the current phase imperialism has had serious consequences for the Chinese people, its resources, land, environment; it polarized the Chinese society and has deprived China of long-term sustainable development.
As we examine carefully the current phase of imperialism we find a seemingly unstoppable monstrous system sweeping the world through the unleashed global monopoly capital, ruthlessly ripping apart the people, land, and environment. 
Imperialism immensely benefited monopoly capital but is devastating the majority of the world’s population, deteriorating its resources and destroying its natural environment. 
Lenin pointed out 100 years ago that imperialism was decadent.
72 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century The global capital class has become more integrated in their interests than any other time in the history of capitalism/imperialism. 
resistance from below, all over the world, is seriously challenging imperialism.
It is up to us to analyze the current phase of imperialism, to strategize and organize our struggle against it, and to defeat it.
Lenin, Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism, Petrograd 1917
Imperialism, Ultra-imperialism
74 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century Does the "Chinese dream" accelerate its own colonization, or is it an imperialist
Will the rise of China become a great power marching towards imperialism?
• What is imperialism?
• Does Lenin's view that "imperialism is monopoly stage of capitalism" remain valid? 
In other words, does a new feature of imperialism, i.e. 
• If Lenin's declaration that "imperialism is the highest stage of capitalism"
is correct, then, is imperialism in the shape of state monopoly capitalism a desperate grasp for air while capitalism is on its deathbed?
76 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century From the distribution of the Global 500, we can see that the strength of today's capitalist monopolies around the world is mainly concentrated in three centers. 
78 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century graduates, and so on, are all top of the world (except on a per capita basis, due to the large population it has). 
Otherwise, there will be no imperialism.
80 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century developed countries, enabling the capitalists there to maintain profitability by offsetting the inevitable falling rate of profit due to the rising organic composition of capital.3 Contrast this analysis with the claim: "In effect, the post-1945 'New Deal'
82 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century 3. 
To understand imperialism, we need to understand its internal dynamics and contradictions. 
This crisis not only drives capitalism towards imperialism, it also intensifies the rivalries between imperialist powers. 
In the imperialist era, domestic class oppression and imperialism around the world are inseparable. 
2) The economic base of imperialism: monopolistic power escalation and the overproduction crisis
84 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century case of the planned economy in the Soviet Union after Khrushchev came to power and before its disintegration). 
Unlike feudal empires that were driven by simple greed, the rise of modern imperialism was originally driven by the need to alleviate domestic overproduction.
Imperialism is thus the inevitable outcome of capitalist development. 
Only in the later stage of development did imperialism get transformed from the export of products to the export of capital.
That is the fundamental reason why imperialism means war.
86 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century conflicts between the EU and the U.S. 
These are in essence the contradictions between imperialism and oppressed nations and peoples.
However, the premise of this conclusion is based on a clear understanding of imperialism. 
88 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century an opportunity to forcefully close many high energy consuming, high pollution enterprises, in order to ease the crisis of overproduction in those affected industries.
revisionism in dealing with imperialism Given these conflicts and crises within the imperialist world, the revolutionaries and progressives are faced with the question of how to understand and resist imperialism.
1) New features of U.S.-led global imperialism
After World War II, especially after the collapse of the Soviet Union, the practice of imperialism has changed. 
The following are several different practices of imperialism after the birth of capitalism:
Early imperialism originated from free competition, which led to industry monopolies or oligarchies, and this led to the emergence of financial hegemony. 
Lenin analyzed this form of imperialism a century ago.
Given these new features, there are at least two theoretical frameworks for analyzing contemporary imperialism among the left and progressives. 
Lenin's theory of imperialism uses the rise of monopoly capitalism as the driving force that generates imperialism. 
A hundred years of history proves that Lenin was right about the nature of imperialism and wars. 
Thus, to understand imperialism, the unit of analysis should be at the most basic functioning cell of capitalism, i.e. 
If one is blind to the power of monopoly capital, one cannot hope to understand imperialism!
2) Resurrection of ultra-imperialism
Alternative to Lenin's analysis is a modern version of Kautsky's ultra-imperialism, which ignores the amount of economic, political, and ultimately military power that each monopoly capitalist is able to bring to bear in carving up the world into "center,"
To them, Lenin's analysis of imperialism is outdated.9
Here is an example of this ultra-imperialism by the aforementioned Voyage One: "the core of China's capitalist sector is the export-manufacturing industry.
90 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century non-productive sectors also account for a considerable proportion, the size of investment in infrastructure facilities is also great, but these sectors either serve the export-manufacturing sector or are attached to the export-manufacturing sector. 
imperialism has not, nor will it in the future, cause any similar major wars between capitalist countries. 
The mistake of ultra-imperialism is that they only see the similarity of interests to oppress the working class among the bourgeoisie in the capitalist system but failed to see the life and death battles between the monopolistic groups. 
92 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century unnecessary, and their initiative for AIIB makes no sense. 
His theory of ultra-imperialism was thrown into the dustbin of history by the reality of two World Wars. 
However, just as the inter-imperialist rivalries are getting more and more intense, the ghost of Kautsky's ultra-imperialism came back to life in the guise of a version of the world-system theory, which not even its main theoretician Wallerstein subscribes to. 
3) No respect to ultra-imperialism by the U.S. 
imperialism must have been such a great regret for the maintenance of the said world-system!
imperialism does defend are not the common interests of world capitalism as a whole, but rather the global interests of U.S. 
imperialism to pass its crisis to have often been the other developed countries. 
94 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century
China and the U.S.-led global imperialism
96 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century In contrast, the ownership of Chinese state-owned companies belongs to the Chinese governmental bureaucracy, rather than the Chinese capitalists as a whole.
100 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century the current top dog for world hegemony? 
leadership in the global imperialism The relation between China and the United States is surely greatly different from that during the Cold War period between the United States and the Soviet Union.
imperialism should be the one that is most clear about who poses a real threat to its hegemony. 
imperialism is in the same situation as was the British. 
102 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century suppressing other nations, is reactionary. 
imperialism has enough nuclear weapons to wipe out the planet several times round. 
Lenin’s Theory of Imperialism
Vladimir Ilyich Ulyanov, better known by his revolutionary alias Lenin, with the publication of his the essay, Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism (1917), became one of the pioneering Marxist authors on the theory of imperialism together with Rudolf Hilferding (Finance Capital), Rosa Luxemburg (Accumulation) and Nikolai Bukharin (Imperialism and World Economy). 
Together, their pioneering writings, dubbed as the "classical Marxist theory of imperialism," surveyed the emergence and development of the world capitalist economy during the early part of the 20th century.
This chapter seeks to give an update on the analyses of the contemporary situation of people's struggles against imperialism and to grapple with theories which have further contributed to the theory of imperialism since Lenin's pioneering study on imperialism. 
The chapter also analyzes the various instruments of modern imperialism today, at a general, theoretical and empirical level. 
imperialism's designs in Korea, the Philippines and most especially in Vietnam, and now in the Middle East, are very disturbing and continue to be so, from the 20th to the 21st century. 
Lenin's Imperialism was actually written in 1916, that is, in the midst of the imperialist war (World War I). 
Printed in 1917, he sought to lay bare the essential nature of imperialism, and thereby to unmask the policies of the imperialist powers, the roots of the imperialist war, the treachery of the other 'socialist' leaders who had gone over to the side of the imperialists, and to show the workers that the way forward was by the overthrow of imperialism.
Lenin showed that imperialism is a new stage of capitalism, and he discovered its nature and its laws of development. 
He showed that the imperialist stage is the highest and last stage of capitalism and that the epoch of imperialism is at the same time the epoch of proletarian revolutions.
Imperialism was defined by Lenin as the monopoly stage of capitalism. 
106 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century 1. 
Hence, Lenin wrote, imperialism is inseparable from imperialist wars. 
(Lenin, 1917) Lenin then showed that with imperialism, all the parasitical features of capitalism are accentuated. 
With imperialism, capitalism is in decay, the stage is set for colonial liberation and for the proletarian revolution.
At the same time Lenin showed how in the imperialist countries the superprofits made by imperialism are used to bribe a section of the working class, who therefore see their own interests as being tied up with those of imperialism. 
Historically, Western imperialism has taken the form of tributary, mercantile imperialism, industrial, financial and militarism forms of empire-building. 
The commercial ascendance of imperialism as a result of its consolidation, led to manufacturing with finance capital, thereby destroying local markets. 
Other Significant Theories of Imperialism
Bukharin's Imperialism and the World Economy gave a comprehensive picture of developments inside the advanced capitalist countries and how they transformed the world economy. 
Lenin critiqued, integrated and popularized the writings of Luxemburg, Hilferding and Bukharin to develop a comprehensive "theory of Imperialism as the highest stage of capitalism."
Multilateral Imperialism
Dan Nabudere's The Political Economy of Imperialism (1978) was a pioneering work on imperialism from the perspective of Africa, one of the first victims of predatory and primitive accumulation by European capitalists through plunder and colonization. 
Nabudere contributed immensely in detailing the history of imperialism from its mercantilist to its present multilateral form. 
He stressed that the changing forms of imperialism have been necessary features of Western capitalism's resilience by containing its own crisis. 
It is therefore necessary to dissect the political, economic and military instruments of modern-day imperialism.
Trade and Imperialism
Foreign Trade, Karl Marx had identified foreign trade as an instrument of imperialism to "buy some necessities of life more cheaply than they could be produced at home, raising the rate of surplus value, and also to buy some means of production cheap, reducing the value composition of capital and from both angles, foreign trade raises the rate of capital." Marx expected the spread of capitalism to lead to full capitalist development everywhere, unless socialist revolution came first. 
108 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century During the past half century, the works of the Monthly Review school notably Baran (1957), Sweezy (1966) and Magdoff (1969), Kemp (1967), Frank (1969), Petras (1980) and Emmanuel (1972), have contributed to the wealth of material on imperialism, both theoretical and empirical. 
These works - from a Marxist point of view, illuminate the theory, history and roots of imperialism, and have definitely contributed to enriching Lenin's basic theory of imperialism, though not always completely agreeing with it, by updating it (Radice, 1980; Brewer, 1980). 
imperialism. 
But more significant are their contributions - through their writings tested in revolutionary praxis like Lenin - on the theory of imperialism coming from revolutionary leaders like Mao Zedong, Ho Chi Minh, Kim Il Sung, Fidel Castro, Che Guevara and Amado Guerrero (nom de guerre of Jose Ma. 
Militarism and Imperialism
imperialism has resorted to militarism and state terror, promoting and supporting militarist and authoritarian dictatorships supporting U.S. 
imperialism that was built on the foundations of genocide, murder and exploitation starting with the extermination of American native Indians to the atrocities in Samar during Philippine-American War and Bud Dajo massacres against the Moro peoples.
imperialism and sections of the local elites who have been co-opted relied on national security laws to suppress the national and democratic aspirations of the people. 
imperialism to extend and justify the use of draconian national security laws and measures such as the U.S. 
These attacks that hit U.S.imperialism's heartland and the very symbols and headquarters of capitalism and the U.S. 
imperialism as well as in countries with strong anti-imperialist states or people's movements, militarism and the adoption of draconian measures became reactions to legitimate people's demands and self-determination by their states.
imperialism today is not only in a state of hegemony but in a state of crisis - both inherent characteristics of moribund capitalism (Lenin, 1917). 
So that now, imperialism must seek new enemies or threats to deflect and distract attention from this crisis. 
110 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century a string of overseas military bases for logistics, repair, replenishment, training, staging area, military power projection and storage of war materiel (Simbulan, 2016).
112 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century It can be recalled that under the 1999 Visiting Forces Agreement(VFA) and the 2014 Enhanced Defense Cooperation Agreement, the coverage for special privileges and criminal immunity includes not only U.S. 
The Cultural Instruments of Imperialism
The cultural hegemony of modern imperialism must not be overlooked or underestimated. 
imperialism's methodical efforts to secure effective legitimacy for American policy in other countries using the writings and interviews with American ideologues like Henry Kissinger, Samuel Huntington, Jeanne Kirkpatrick, and Francis Fukuyama - to name a few of U.S. 
imperialism's foremost contemporary rightwing ideologues. 
114 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century The biggest U.S. 
100 years after it was written, Lenin's seminal work, Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism, continues to be a guide to our understanding of imperialism, unmasking its dynamics and motivations. 
Unequal Exchange, A Study of the Imperialism of Trade.
Marxist Theories of Imperialism: A Critical Survey. 
Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism. 
116 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century Magdoff, Harry (1978). 
Imperialism: From the Colonial Stage to the Present. 
Nabudere, Dan (1978) The Political Economy of Imperialism. 
(1980) International Firms and Modern Imperialism. 
Lenin sat down to write one of his major works, Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism, with its theses about the five features of a capitalist system gone monopolistic. 
He asserted that the fifth feature of imperialism
According to Lenin, modern imperialism as the highest stage of capitalism is distinguished by five key features: (1) the extreme concentration of capital such that monopolies dominate; (2) the emergence of finance capital from the merger of industrial and bank capital, leading to the rule of finance oligarchy; (3) the export of capital to other countries; (4) the formation of international cartels or economic alliances for the control of global markets; and (5) the complete division of the world among the imperialist powers.
Some of the key economic features of imperialism were already explored earlier by such writers as J.A. 
Lenin asserted that imperialism's fifth feature meant, first of all, that every imperialist power strove to maintain and expand its own sphere of influence in the world by exercising control over other countries as direct colonies, semi-colonies, and other types of dependencies.
Lenin, “Preface to the French and German Editions” in Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism.
118 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century The post-World War I situation would unravel anew to bring forth revived militarism and fascism among the big capitalist powers, eventually leading to the more vast and destructive World War II. 
Thus, the questions remain: Has imperialism truly and finally reached a stage where it can already avoid a destructive world war? 
What are the dominant and long-term trends that give continuing shape to imperialism's fifth feature?
A Restatement of Lenin’s Fifth Feature of Imperialism We proceed by restating the main points of Lenin's explanation about imperialism's fifth feature as elaborated in Part VI of his work Imperialism, The Highest Stage of Capitalism.
Modern imperialism's hunger for colonies
This first impulse intensified under imperialism; monopoly capitalists wanted to control existing and potential sources of raw materials and new processes while blocking off any competitors. 
The drive to export capital — a feature of imperialism — also impelled the acquisition of more colonies and semi-colonies.
Forms of dependency under imperialism
Under modern imperialism evolved several transitional and diverse forms of state dependence. 
Lenin explained: "Relations of this kind have always existed between big and little states, but in the epoch of capitalist imperialism they become a general system, they form part of the sum total of 'divide the world' relations and become links in the chain of operations of world finance capital."2
The theory of 'supra-imperialism'
Karl Kautsky3 pushed his own concept of “supra-imperialism,” which was very different from Lenin's theses. 
"imperialism" was not an inevitable stage of monopoly capitalism, but merely as a policy “preferred” by finance capital.
He envisioned capitalism evolving into "supra-imperialism" – a union of all imperialist states in which finance capital shall have become a single global monopoly exploiting the whole world. 
Under “supra-imperialism,” the unevenness and contradictions inherent in the world economy shall have diminished. 
Lenin, Imperialism
120 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century Struggle to redivide the world inevitably leads to war Lenin criticized Kautsky's theory, explaining that “supra-imperialism" — while theoretically possible — exists only as "an abstract future possibility", whereas it distracted from the early 20th-century “depth of existing antagonisms.”
Imperialism intensifies national oppression
Imperialism worsens national oppression which, in turn, aggravates the unevenness inherent in capitalist development.
Modern imperialism, which increases the tendency to subjugate weaker nations, is a new factor intensifying national oppression.”4
Always present in Lenin's work on imperialism as an underlying premise is the reality of bourgeois class dictatorship in its many forms and components. 
The Bolsheviks and the Russian working class had been taking on the worst exemplary case of what Lenin called "military-feudal imperialism" — the tsarist autocracy — as their direct enemy until 1917. 
The successive periods of world history in the past 100 years essentially confirm Lenin's theses on imperialism. 
122 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century launches wars of aggression to redivide the world."6 The parties of the Comintern exposed the related trends of fascism and war preparations, and called for a united front against both. 
Meanwhile, national liberation movements continued to fight imperialism and took big strides forward in Asia, Africa and Latin America.
response was to launch the Cold War, which generated an intensely militarist and anti-communist, almost paranoid, paradigm of imperialism.
It was used to justify US imperialism's global military buildup and aggression as the 7 Baran and Sweezy, Monopoly Capital, p. 
124 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century defender of the "free world," and to demonize socialist states as “totalitarian regimes.”
Sliding into social-imperialism, it engaged the US in superpower rivalry for world hegemony. 
126 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century The period ended with the Indochina peoples' victory in 1975. 
US imperialism's historic defeat in Indochina resonated throughout the world and caused it to decline on a world scale. 
And third, almost all former colonies in the pre-World War II period had turned, or would soon turn, into formally independent states while imperialism would exert all efforts to keep them as neocolonies.
These were followed by the Islamic revolution that toppled the US-Shah Reza Pahlavi regime in Iran and the Sandinista (FSLN) revolution that 8 See table on “Colonial Possessions of the Great Powers” in Lenin’s Imperialism, p. 
128 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century toppled the US-Somoza regime in Nicaragua, both in 1979. 
Unipolar imperialism (1990-2001)
We can thus speak of the US-EU-Japan as a “Triad Imperialism”, in this particular sense and period.
This further enhanced the unipolar advantages of US imperialism.
130 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century Global "war on terror" (2001-2008)
The second phase began with the September 11, 2011 terrorist attacks, which signaled a major foreign policy shift of US imperialism and its allies to a global "war on terror". 
clear result, as Lenin had generalized for the whole epoch of imperialism, is the intensification of inter-imperialist rivalries and factors for war.
132 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century At least three distinct trends have emerged in US political-military strategy after the Cold War. 
The spread of jihad movements, in particular, are used by the big powers to divide, confuse and subvert Third World unity against imperialism, as well as to weaken their rivals' control over their respective spheres of influence. 
134 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century wars and other forms of socio-political turmoil with religious and ethnic overtones, and which have directly or indirectly involved the big powers. 
Projecting the Future of Inter-Imperialist Rivalries In conclusion, this paper reiterates the continuing validity of the fifth feature of imperialism in the current era. 
During Lenin's time, other Marxist leaders such as Rosa Luxemburg and Karl Liebknecht had given additional emphasis to the phenomenon of militarism.The topic was explored extensively in Liebknecht's Militarism and Anti-Militarism (1907).17 Many anti-imperialist writers have explored this feature of imperialism beyond the particularities of Lenin's time.
Half a century later, Baran and Sweezy, in Monopoly Capital, devoted an entire chapter on precisely this question.18 The workings of an imperialist state greatly dependent on military power is further explored in Alfred Szymanski's The Logic of Imperialism.19 It is best for the reader to go through the cited chapters.
It continued to grow in the past 50 years since then, even way beyond the Cold War, attesting to its being deeply embedded into the very core architecture of imperialism.
marxistsfr.org/archive/liebknecht-k/works/1907/militarism-antimilitarism/index.htm 18 Baran and Sweezy, “The Absorption of Surplus: Militarism and Imperialism” in Monopoly Capital, pp.178-214.
The Logic of Imperialism, pp.177-216
136 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century Military spending by the top capitalist powers has continued to bloat up.20 The US and other developed countries, which are mostly the biggest military spenders, are also the biggest arms traders, suppliers, and military aid givers to armies worldwide.21
socialist camp, imperialism vs. 
Lenin's five features of imperialism were confirmed anew — even most thoroughly by World War II in the case of the fifth feature.
Thus, the Cold War morphed from its original character as an historic struggle between imperialism and socialism into a global rivalry between two imperialist superpowers. 
While this US-Soviet rivalry did not erupt into a World War III, its relentless arms race and proxy wars served to revalidate Lenin's thesis about imperialism and war.
Again, after the Cold War, US imperialism seemed to dominate a unipolar world with no effective counter-pole. 
Amin's thesis of 'collective imperialism' . 
Samir Amin has his own 12 theses on what happened to imperialism since Lenin wrote his work.22 His 10th thesis asserts that there has occurred a “shift from the period of inter-imperialist conflict depicted by Lenin, to the period of U.S. 
hegemony during the Cold War, to the collective imperialism” by the US-led Triad (with EU and Japan) by end-20th century.
Amin expounds on this Triad by claiming that "collective imperialism finds its raison d’être in the awareness by the bourgeoisies in the triad nations of the necessity 22 Samir Amin is aligned with the Marxian-dependency theorists clustering around the Monthly Review together with Paul Baran, Paul Sweezy, Harry Magdoff, and Andre Gunder Frank. 
His 12 theses on imperialism were presented in a Monthly Review article in 2011 article by John Bellamy Foster (MR vol. 
138 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century for their joint management of the world..." He asserts that the enmity between the Triad, on one hand, and China and Russia, on the other hand, are not inter-imperialist rivalries but conflicts between the imperialist centers, on one hand, and two states in the "peripheries" which have so far refused to become mere "neo-comprador bourgeoisies" like the rest of the Third World on the other hand.23
This thesis, however valid for a very specific period of imperialism, cannot disregard the fundamental basis for inter-imperialist conflicts from which Lenin derived the fifth feature. 
hegemony during the Cold War” (1947-1990) and the “period of collective imperialism” by the US-led triad (1990-present) merely represent new or transitional forms of such conflicts. 
The fifth feature of imperialism remains as valid as ever.
Continuing era of imperialism and socialist revolutions The future of imperialism and inter-imperialist rivalries cannot be projected separately from the future of socialist revolutions. 
As Lenin stated, the era of imperialism is the era of the proletarian revolution. 
As Lenin reminded us all: “Only a proletarian socialist revolution can lead humanity out of the impasse which imperialism and imperialist wars have created.
Marxist Theories of Imperialism: A Critical Survey. 
Marxist_Theories_of_Imperialism.pdf
The Enemy: Notes on Imperialism and Revolution. 
Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism (A Popular Outline). 
"Preface to the French and German Editions" in Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism.
Imperialism without Colonies. 
The Future of Imperialism
It is difficult or even impossible to discuss and elaborate on the future of imperialism (monopoly capitalism) and socialism without understanding the laws of motion involved in social transformation and the trajectory of developments from the past to the present, especially at this time when imperialism is still dominant and socialism has still to resurge by taking advantage of the persistent economic and financial crises and aggressive wars that manifest the parasitic, violent, decadent and moribund character of imperialism.
At any rate, we are well past the time when a factotum of US imperialism could arrogantly claim that humankind cannot go beyond capitalism and liberal democracy and that the socialist cause is dead because of the restoration of capitalism in China, the Soviet Union, Eastern Europe and East Germany before the 20th century was over.
At the International Seminar on Mao Zedong Thought to mark the 100th birth anniversary of Comrade Mao Zedong in 1993, the Communist Party of the Philippines declared that we are still in the era of modern imperialism and proletarian revolution, even as the former seems to reign without serious challenge and the latter has taken a strategic retreat as a result of the betrayal of socialism by the modern revisionists that started in earnest in the Soviet Union during the time of Khruschov.
Since the last decade of the 20th century, we have witnessed the overweening arrogance and yet self-defeating direction of the ideological, political, economic and military offensives undertaken by US imperialism and its NATO allies to attack the proletariat and the oppressed peoples and nations. 
142 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century harsh consequences have served to stress the point that there is no alternative to imperialism but socialism.
144 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century Part II. 
Lenin in the Era of Modern Imperialism
In political economy, Lenin studied the development of free competition capitalism to monopoly capitalism or modern imperialism and defined the latter as the highest and final stage of capitalism. 
He described the five features of imperialism: the dominance of monopoly capital in the capitalist economy, the merger of bank capital with industrial capital becomes the basis of finance capital, the higher importance of the export of surplus capital than that of surplus commodities, the rise of international combines of monopoly capitalist corporations to share the world among them and the territorial division of the world among the strongest imperialist powers has been completed.
146 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century Stalin was ever loyal to Lenin and Leninism and adhered to Marxism-Leninism.
He excelled at fighting imperialism and fascism to uphold, defend and advance socialism in the Soviet Union, he succeeded in building the Soviet socialist economy from 1928 to 1940 and rebuilding it from 1945 to 1953, in developing the educational and cultural system of the working class, in inspiring the Soviet people to fight and defeat Nazi Germany and fascism, in promoting the international communist movement and in supporting communist-led forces to establish people’s democracies and socialist states (in Eastern Europe, East Germany, China and Korea) as well as movements for national liberation and in facing up to the US and its imperialist allies in the aftermath of World War II.
148 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century (socialist in word and imperialist in deed) by invading Czechoslovakia in 1968, attacking Zhenbao Island in the Wusuli River and deploying a million troops along the Sino-Soviet border.
Against Imperialism and Revisionism
At the time of the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution (GPCR), Mao Zedong Thought was described as the guide to revolutionary action in the context of imperialism heading for total collapse and socialism winning total victory in the world.
To be circumspect and to reflect the current strategic situation we can say that we are still in the era of imperialism and proletarian revolution. 
Indeed, imperialism is still dominant and socialism still needs to resurge. 
The stage of Maoism can extend to the period of new victories of socialism over imperialism and all reaction in various countries.
150 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century the conditions and needs of the workers and sustain their close relations with the workers.
The Future of Imperialism and Socialism
After the foregoing analysis of the past and current situation of imperialism and the socialist cause, we can now try to predict their probable course and future.
Imperialism or monopoly capitalism is a dying system of greed and terror beneficial only to a few at the expense of the proletariat and the people who create the social wealth but are exploited and oppressed. 
Because of the ever-worsening crisis and destructiveness of imperialism, the objective conditions have become favorable for the advance of the subjective forces of the anti-imperialist, democratic and socialist movement.
152 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century Following the full restoration of capitalism in revisionist-ruled countries and the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, the US appeared as the winner in the bipolar world of the Cold War and as the sole superpower in the capitalist world for an indefinitely long time. 
Since then, some people have even imagined that imperialism is forever and that history cannot go beyond capitalism and liberal democracy.
They have grown in number since 1968 and have been caused by imperialism and domestic reaction.
In the face of the ever-worsening crisis of monopoly capitalism and the spread of wars, we can confidently say that imperialism is doomed and that we are on the eve of a worldwide upsurge of the socialist revolution. 
We are in transition from a world dominated by imperialism to one in which socialism would resurge and become more established than ever before. 
154 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century The calls for studying and applying the revolutionary principles and accomplishments of Marx, Engels, Lenin, Stalin and Mao are resounding. 
The entire range of the theory and practice of Marxism-Leninism-Maoism and the theory and practice of continuing revolution under proletarian dictatorship through cultural revolution provide answers to questions about the future of imperialism and socialism, even as the worsening conditions of crises and wars push the people to resist the imperialists and reactionaries and take the revolutionary road to socialism.
The subjective forces needed to engage in revolutionary mass struggles against imperialism and domestic reaction are the revolutionary party of the proletariat, the mass organizations of the toiling masses of workers and peasants and the urban petty bourgeoisie, the self-defense units of mass organizations and offensive armed units of the people’s army and the organs of political power. 
This grasps the fundamental principles of repudiating capitalism and embracing the socialist cause, the experience and lessons of socialist revolution and construction in the era of imperialism and proletarian revolution and the theory and practice of cultural revolution to combat modern revisionism, prevent capitalist restoration and consolidate the socialist system. 
At the rate that imperialism is discrediting itself and offending the people with its recurrent and worsening crisis, state terrorism and wars of aggression in the early decades of the 21st century, we are confident that the revolutionary anti-imperialist, democratic and socialist movements will thrive and become far more successful than those of the 20th century. 
imperialism, the way would become wide open for reaching the stage of communism on the basis of the achievements of socialist revolution and construction.
The New Imperialism (New York: Oxford University Press, 2003) ____________. 
156 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century ____________. 
Crisis of Imperialism and People's Resistance; Selected Writings 1991-2009 (Philippines: Aklat ng Bayan, Inc., 2009) ____________. 
158 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century ____________. 
Lenin, Imperialism: The Highest Stage of Capitalism (1916); Selected Works, Volume I, pp.667-766 (Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1963) ____________. 
Some of her writings include: “New Phase of Imperialism and China” published in May 2015 in Critique and Transformation; Revolution and Counterrevolution – China’s Continuing Class Struggle since Liberation, published by the Institute of Political Economy in 2012; “Challenging the Conventional Wisdom on the Causes and Cures of the Current Economic Crisis” published in the Institute of Political Economy Journals in 2010; and Globalization and Crisis of Capitalism, a book in Chinese published in Taiwan in 2005.
162 Lenin’s Imperialism in the 21st Century Paul L. 
Quintos is currently the Research Coordinator of the International League of Peoples’ Stuggle (ILPS), an anti-imperialist and democratic formation that promotes, supports and develops peoples’ resistance to imperialism and all reaction.
